6.Can distinction between real and virtual sustain?Discuss

20161205
MEHTHAB SHAIK


Let us consider 6 scenarios -

1.There is a computer simulation of a Bob ,waving at Alice , Bob’s good friend from 100 metres away. Alice sees Bob waving at her from 100 metres away ,she waves back
2. There is a computer simulation of Bob waving to Alice,15 metres away from her.
3. Bob pulls a prank on Alice by lying to her that her cat is lost ,when he had just hidden the cat in his garage.Alice then sets out to look for her cat.
4. Alice needs to return to her grandmother her old books which Alice had borrowed .In a hurry ,Alice instead grabs the carton with her old textbooks and does not check. On her way Bob meets her and asks what she was carrying.She replies they were her grandmother’s books.
5.Alice had a sleepless night .She had to choose between David and Jeremy ,she did not want to hurt either of them. Seeing her dull and sighing at breakfast ,her mother asks her what was wrong and she replies it was nothing. At last by evening she informs David and Jeremy of her decision. She has chosen Jeremy. The next day in the evening Jeremy and Alice go on their first date to a newly open restaurant where entry is allowed to premium players and their one guest. Jeremy had a premium account on second life while Alice had a basic one.
6.An advanced robot developed by Bob’s Father ,an eminent scientist ,is walking Alice home after grocery shopping as they have been doing for years .They do their homework together and go hiking on weekends as they always did.

To be able to answer whether each of the above scenarios is real or virtual , Above issues occur in epistemology and metaphysics.

What is real ?How do we know what we know what we know is correct ?Difference between reality and perception are all questions in philosophy which have been attempted to be answeed by many - I tried John Locke ,Rene Descartes , Plato’s  ideas ,as summarized below - 

Plato’s three levels of Reality -

The first level  of reality contains the forms. This reality is completely impervious to time itself and will never change.
The second level is our perceived world as we live in it today. Everything around us is changing constantly.
The third level of reality is nothingness. This reality speaks for itself, in that it is absolutely nothing.

What i got from Plato is that his first level of reality is the scientific reality - that which contains measurable properties like weight and size .(leaving quantum mechanical ideas ).
The second level is the perception - like the colour,smell,taste and other attributes like whether something is big or small  - these are person dependent(the also differ from species to species) and cannot be verified or common exactly to all ,but  weight and size can be verified and common to all..(weighing balance and meter scale) .

Descarte on reality [Idea,Substance,Mode] :

The Mind -

In Descartes his first and second meditations he claims that all our beliefs can be doubted because our senses could simply be just an illusion, he goes on to say that although all our beliefs cannot be certain, because we think and experience, our minds must exist. Descartes argued that our ordinary experiences and views of the world cannot give us the kind of affirmed foundation on which all other knowledge and beliefs can be based. We are often dismayed to acknowledge that what we have learned is simply detriment, or that what our senses tell us is not certain. That should make us wonder about whether all the other things we believe might also be uncertain. So is there anything that we can know for certain without a doubt? We can doubt whether there is a physical world and whether we have a physical body. We can doubt whether our own reasoning can be trusted, so then what can we absolutely know for certain? Descartes gives an example that even if a higher power deceives us about all our other beliefs, there is one belief that we can be certain about, which is that we are thinking. Even to doubt this belief is proving that we are thinking. And since thinking cannot occur without there being something that does the thinking, this proves that we exist. When we think, it proves we have a mind, regardless of whether we have bodies. The body we experience as our own is not an essential part of our self because we can doubt its existence in a way that we cannot doubt the existence of our mind.

Formal - Objective Reality -

The formal reality of a thing is the kind of reality the thing possesses in virtue of its being an actual or an existent thingThe formal reality of a thing is the kind of reality the thing possesses in virtue of its being an actual or an existent thing.For example, given that the Sun is an actual or existent thing, it possesses formal reality. By contrast, given that Pegasus is not an actual or existent thing, he does not possess formal reality. Given that the idea of the Sun or the idea of Pegasus are actual or existent ideas, where an idea is actual or existent when it is being actively thought by a mind, each would possess formal reality.

The objective reality of a thing is the kind of reality a thing possesses in virtue of its being a representation of something (ibid.). Given that the idea of the Sun and the idea of Pegasus represent things to the mind (they represent or exhibit the Sun and Pegasus respectively), each possesses objective reality. Descartes says that ideas possess objective reality by their very nature. Equally importantly, ideas are the only items in his ontology that possess both formal and objective reality.

Kant - mind creates reality.

John Locke on Reality -

John Locke stated that we define objects by primary and secondary properties; primary properties being undeniably objective features such as size and shape, and secondary properties being subjective such as colour and taste.  Locke’s theory on reality is called Representative Realism, it is the view that sense data (an immediate object of perception, which is not a material object; a sense impression) somehow represents the objects and that these objects are causally involved in our production of the sense data. Our perception of objects is thus indirect; hence, representative realism is a kind of indirect realism. This view argues that we experience reality indirectly by perceptions that represent the real world. So, if we see a brown table, what we are actually seeing is not the table itself but a representation of it. In this way, differences of perception which occur due to changes in light conditions, position of viewer, etc., can be easily explained: it is not the object which is changing, only the perception of it. As an example, a man is standing on the corner of a busy road and witnesses two cars collide. Neither driver is hurt, but both step out of their cars to inspect the damage. Driver A is a young mother with a young child in the back of the car; driver B is a business executive in a hurry; the witness is an old man wearing glasses. As the two drivers argue about whose fault it was, the man approaches them and offers to confirm what he saw happening. What does each of them see? Whose is the correct view? 
It is evident that the mind knows not things immediately, but only by the intervention of the ideas it has of them. Our knowledge therefore, is real, only so far as there is conformity between our ideas and the reality of things. But what shall be here the criterion? How shall the mind, when it perceives nothing but its own ideas, know they agree with things themselves? (John Locke, 452)

Plato and Descarte agree in that there is some underlying reality but John Locke does not claim any absolute reality.Plato’s ideas are not more useful than they mark a distinction between perceived reality and the absolute reality ,which is the same as objective and subjective distinction of Locke’s . The formal-objective reality distinction of Descarte’s is interesting when applied to Artiicial Intelligence ,VR,Robots and modern tech. Done later in the essay. 

On Virtuality - 

Deleuze’s concept - 

Deleuze's concept of the virtual has two aspects: first, the virtual is a kind of surface effect produced by actual causal interactions at the material level.[citation needed] When one uses a computer, the monitor displays an image that depends on physical interactions happening at the level of hardware. The window is nowhere in actuality, but is nonetheless real and can be interacted with. This example actually leads to the second aspect of the virtual that Deleuze insists upon: its generative nature. This virtual is a kind of potentiality that becomes fulfilled in the actual. It is still not material, but it is real.

Denis Berthier - . It is what is not real, but displays the full qualities of the real—in a plainly actual (i.e., not potential)—way. The prototypical case is a reflection in a mirror: it is already there, whether or not one can see it; it is not waiting for any kind of actualization. This definition allows one to understand that real effects may be issued from a virtual object, so that our perception of it and our whole relation to it, are fully real, even if it is not. This explains how virtual reality can be used to cure phobias. 

Applying the above ideas to the scenario (1). The computer simulation Bob conforms with Deleuze’s concept of virtuality -  as in the simulation Bob is “real”  ,created by circuits which are very much real.
But is not “real Bob” - who possesses other attributes such as mass, DNA ,etc, unlike the simulation.
But the simulation and Bob have things in common - the outward appearance from afar , and that both are in the habit of waving at Alice  - simulation because it is programmed and Bob because he has developed that habit over  years .

From Alice’s point of view - if Bob is 100 metres away - she cannot see the physical changes in the simulation - so to her it is still Bob - but to be sure of the reality of Bob waving at her - according to Locke - she will have to verify that it is Bob - she can do this by asking witnesses whether they saw Bob waving at her but that is again perspective-dependent of witness - a more scientific method is the DNA karyotype - for the sake of this argument let us assume that there is a reality and that it can be measured - scientific realism - such a test will prove that simulation is not Bob.

 The philosopher Philip Brey, in particular, has developed a sophisticated framework for thinking about the reality of virtual reality. He argues that some virtual objects and events are obviously not real (they are merely representations or simulacra), but others are every bit as real as their real world analogues. He suggests that we use John Searle’s theory of social reality to tell the difference.

Brey’s framework -

Having established that virtual objects are real but not the same real as what they represent ,we now try to categorise these objects :   

The Physical Reality and Functional Reality :

Virtual objects can again be categorized as the physical real and functional real -

Physical real types or the essentially physical types are those that must have some physical form to be as real as what they represent .This physical form is essential in their being able to perform the function as their subjects. For ,instance - take a hammer -how can one have a virtual hammer that performs as a hammer - this is only possible if this object has a heavy weight to a shaft - which becomes a real hammer with nothing virtual about it. Another example would be food items - the only way for an object to be real food is to be real food - to be bitten into and swallowed -filling the stomach. 
Thus any simulations of such objects possess only objective reality (Descarte’s) but no formal reality of their subjects - their formal reality is most likely some hardware/software quite different from their subjects.

There are some reals that do not have an essential physical form - say,a Doctor - by definition doctor is an entity which cures an illness - it does not necessarily have to be a person. So if there comes an advanced AI which is able to treat people for illness - and its successful - then this AI is a real doctor.
But is it then still virtual - I will say that the virtuality will be lost when the formal reality and objective reality of any real identity with same function can match- have a one-one correspondence - with that of the virtual one - but since these are again lacking in formal reality - 

The formal reality of a “real” doctor - his degree, age, experience,  weight,height ,etc
The formal reality of a “virtual”  doctor - degree(can take some medical tests) , experience,age,date of birth - but not weight and height .
  
The objective reality of “real” doctor - cures /treats illness
The functional reality of “virtual” doctor - cures/treats illnesses 

The above type is non-physical functionals (although they do have some physical form as chips and circuits).

The above two are what Searle calls virtual objects . Following -

The third type is the social virtuals or the virtual events - 
 These are a sub-category of non-physical functional kinds, which are particularly interesting because of their practical importance .

Money depends on human minds for its existence. Gold, silver, paper and other physical tokens do not count as money in virtue of their physical properties or characteristics (contrary to what people often believe). They count as money because human minds have conferred the functional status of money on them through an exercise of collective imagination. In other words, particular physical tokens only count as money because most of us agree that they count as money. In theory, we can confer the functional status of money on any token, be it an exquisitely sculpted metal coin or a digital register of bank balances. In practice, certain tokens are better suited to the functional task than others. This is due to their durability and incorruptibility. Nevertheless, this hasn’t stopped us from conferring the functional status of money on virtual tokens. Indeed, most money that is in existence today is virtual in nature: it only exists in digital bank balances; it does not, and never  will, exist in the form of notes or coins. We happily pay for goods and services with this ‘virtual’ money, even though it lacks physical tangibility. This virtual money is still epistemically objective in nature. I cannot unilaterally imagine more money into my bank account. My current financial status is a matter of intersubjectively agreed upon fact.

Searle argues that many social kinds share these twin properties of ontological subjectivity and epistemic objectivity. Examples include marriages, property, legal rights and duties generally, corporations, political offices and so on. He calls these ‘institutional facts’. These are social kinds that come into existence through the collective agreement upon a constitutive rule. The constitutive rule takes the form ‘X counts as Y in context C’. In the case of money, the constitutive rule might read something like ‘Precious metal coins of with features a, b, c, count as money for the purposes of purchasing goods and services’. Searle doesn’t think that we explicitly formulate constitutive rules for all social objects and events. Some constitutive rules are implicit in how we behave and act; others are more explicit.

What’s interesting about Searle’s theory is that it means that much of our everyday social reality is, in a sense, already ‘virtual’ in nature. It doesn’t depend on any physical, real world properties or characteristics for its existence. Money, marriages, property, rights, duties, political offices and the like do not exist ‘out there’ in the physical world; they exist inside our (collective) minds. They are fictional projections of our minds over the physical reality we inhabit. In principle, we can project the same social reality over anything, including the representations and simulations that exist within virtual reality. Thus, according to Brey, we can ontologically recreate things like money, marriage, rights, duties, political offices, and so forth in virtual worlds. All it takes is some collective imagination and will.

I disagree with Searle/Brey on his ideas on virtual events - because what he states as virtual events are in fact real - as we now compare formal reality of a trade using money in cash and trade by virtual cash .
Formal reality of trade - give something for something else
Objective reality - exchanging items

This would be the same if the trade was done by virtual cash .
That is,the trade is very much real but the cash is not .

Virtual fictionals - these are objects that have objective reality but no formal reality whatsoever - these are fictional characters entities - For ,instance Harry Potter - he is real in idea only - there is no formal reality that can be verified to be true - his height ,birthdate etc. 

Lastly - Virtual Actions - 

Brey claims virtual actions are as real as “real” actions - that is to say the decisions made in virtual environments by a virtual character is made by its human controller -hence extravirtual - I disagree with Brey on this one too - as he treats actions as decisions. Killing a character in a game is a decision - a real one ,but the death of the character is virtual as it was never living to begin with.

Therefore to distinguish between virtual and real I define virtual as -

An object/event or action that does not  have an exactly corresponding formal reality and objective reality in a real  object/event or action, and its formal reality can be verified using scientific methods.

What happens with this is that the first AI for a job would be classified as virtual ,then the following AI would find not match again in reals as its only match is already a virtual and is again added to virtual.

This is not a sound argument but it is valid.

Then I make an assumption - scientific realism - there is a real out there that can be measured by an existing scientific .
These scientific methods will be use to verify the formal reality statement of event/object/action .



There is another problem - the sustenance - the distinction between virtual and real cannot be maintained continuously -  a player playing against computer does acknowledge his opponent is computer but during the game there will be some point when he will refer in his mind to the computer player the same way he would a human/living player.

But if frequent acknowledgement is enough for sustenance - then I claim that the distinction between real and virtual can be maintained .   As when we fail to do so the previously virtual 
Will no longer be virtual.

& (2) For best accuracy - the best test for Bob’s identification - DNA.
(3) This searching of Alice for her cat is real - but Alice’s cat being lost is virtual as being lost means unknown whereabouts but Bob knows the cats whereabouts
(4) The event of box carrying grandmother’s books is virtual - as ti is based on make believe and on checking will clearly come out false.
(5)The social network - has very real consequences and effects as Alice may truly become affectionate of real Jeremy and she did think alot for the decision - the date can also be real as long as its having a good time - but if going to a restaurant is taken into account it becomes virtual.
(6) Same as (1) ans (2)


I conclude that virtual objects/events are real but going to virtual restaurant is not same real as going to a real-life restaurant ,though the virtual restaurant and real-life restaurant are again both real - this distinciton comes from classifying reality. 

Another issue is that this model clearly classifies the naturally born - humans,etc as real . And it will remain so - this is due to the assumption on scientific realism - as scientific methods are developed on observed world - thus the only way for a virtual to be misclassified as real is for it to conform to all scientific tests - say a virtual apple has average mass of apples - that contains mallic acid an satisfies other such chemical tests - is very much our understanding of an apple - as a real apple ,thus its real .
Without scientific realism the disticntion is difficult to verify and remain uncertain then it is very much possible to lose a clear line between real and virtual 

I use Descarte’s distinction on reality and mind and thinking as established real and Locke’s verification for the above with instances from Brey’s work

